The first Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) is to reduce global poverty. As a custodian agency responsible for monitoring progress, the World Bank measures and monitors global poverty across countries based on income or consumption expenditures reported in household budget surveys and the international poverty lines. However, the current practice of measuring global poverty implicitly adopts official national definitions of urban areas, which have been shown to vary widely across countries. This variation poses a challenge in disaggregating poverty by urban and rural areas in a globally comparable way. The lack of globally consistent information on urban poverty hinders efficient and effective resource allocation to achieve the SDGs. National governments may struggle to allocate resources optimally between urban and rural areas, as well as between different types of urban areas within their countries.

Building on recent work by Combes et al. (2023), this paper aims to provide new evidence on poverty distributions within and between countries based on globally consistent urban and rural poverty measurements. Combes et al. (2023) present a new effort to consistently delineate urban areas across countries using two different approaches: the Degree of Urbanization (DOU) and Dartboard (DB) approaches. The DOU approach classifies cells in a gridded population layer into different urban and rural categories by applying uniform population and population density thresholds to all countries (Dijkstra et al., 2021). Meanwhile, the DB approach also classifies gridded population cells but distinguishes different urban and rural categories based on each country’s own population density distribution (de Bellefon et al., 2021). In other words, the DOU is an absolute measure of urbanization, while the DB is a relative measure. These new measures suggest that official urban definitions tend to underestimate urban population shares in Sub-Saharan Africa. Moreover, the DOU and DB approaches distinguish multiple types of urban areas, providing a more nuanced understanding of urbanization beyond a simple urban-rural dichotomy. For this study, a novel dataset was created by integrating these new urban classifications into the existing household budget surveys, covering 221,000 households and approximately 1 million individuals from 20 low- and middle-income countries across the world.
