Surveys often struggle to capture the living conditions of the richest of the population. This “missing rich” issue stems from a plethora of reasons, including item nonresponse (richer households more likely to not respond to welfare related modules of the survey) unit nonresponse (richer households more likely to not partake in surveys), accessibility issues (the rich more likely to live in hard to access places such as gated communities), and underreporting of their welfare. Further, there are consumption patterns and income sources that are specifically consumed or earned by the rich that the surveys cannot capture (e.g. capital income). Whilst the lack of accurate representation of the living conditions of the rich in the survey distribution will not have a huge effect on the poverty rate, it can significantly underestimate the level of inequality within societies.

One way in which this issue has been tackled with is by utilizing the gap between the national account mean and the survey mean as a proxy for the "missing rich". Whilst [Lakner and Milanovic (2013)](https://doi.org/10.1596/1813-9450-6719) attributes the entire gap as the proxy for the missing top income in surveys, [Chandy and Seidel (2017)](https://www.brookings.edu/articles/how-much-do-we-really-know-about-inequality-within-countries-around-the-world/) argue that due to discrepancies in the definitions of income and consumption in surveys and national accounts, it is more justifiable to utilize a portion of the discrepancy between the survey mean and the nationla account mean. [Prydz, Jolliffe, and Serajuddin (2022)](https://doi.org/10.1111/roiw.12577) follow [Chandy and Seidel (2017)](https://www.brookings.edu/articles/how-much-do-we-really-know-about-inequality-within-countries-around-the-world/) and attribute 50% of the gap between the Household Final Consumption Expenditure (HFCE) and the survey to the missing top. This analysis is also repeated by attributing 50% of the gap between GDP per capita and the survey mean.

The aim of this approach is first to elongate the survey distirbution to capture the missing top by assuming that it follows a Pareto distribution; second is to attribute half of the survey-national accounts gap to the missing top represented by the extended portion of the survey distribution; and finally to reweight the survey distribution in light of the extended tail. In sum, this method imputes the "missing top" whilst maintaining the shape of the original survey distribution.

In extending the tail, the shape of the missing distribution (the thickness of the tail) is dervied from the top decile of the survey distribution. Imagine a psuedo distribution which is comprised of the top decile of the survey distribution and the missing top, for which $L^* $ denotes the share of total income of this pseudo distribution captured by the top decile of the survey distirbution: $L^* = \frac{l_{0.1}\bar{y}_{svy}}{l_{0.1}\bar{y}_{svy} + \frac{1}{2}(\bar{y}_{na} - \bar{y}_{svy})}  $, where $l_{0.1}$ is the share of the survey distribution income that is attributable to the top decile of the survey population, $\bar{y}_{svy}$ and $\bar{y}_{na}$ are the survey and the national account mean respectively. The Pareto shape parameter $\alpha$ is found by solving the following equation: $\alpha^* = 1 + \frac{log(1-L^*)}{log(\frac{k}{y})} $, where $k$ is the minimum income of this pseudo distribution (i.e. 90th percentile of the survey distribution) and $y$ is the maximum income recorded in the survey.

Once we obtain the Pareto parameter $\alpha$, the next step is to attribute the national account-survey gap to the extended portion of the distribution (missing top). This is derived first by calculating the share of the population that was captured by the survey in the pseudo distribution: $p^* = 1 - (\frac{k}{y})^{\alpha^*}$. Second, for those in the pseudo distirbution that was not captured by the survey (i.e. for population $p$ where $p^* < p \le 1$), the share of income attributed to each centile of the missing popoulation is calculated by the Lorenz curve formula: $L(p) = 1 - (1-p)^{1-{\frac{1}{\alpha}}} $.

Finally, this pseudo distribution is combined with the survey distirbution to create the final adjusted national distribution by rescaling the cumulative population and income share of the survey and the psuedo distribution. For a more detailed explanation, please see [Chandy and Seidel (2017b)](https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/technical-appendix-02-13-17.pdf).

For the purposes of sensitivity checks, we provide estimates which attributes 50, 70, 90, and 100% of the survey-national account gap to the missing top. In addition, we provide estimates using both the HFCE and GDP.
