Jolliffe and Tetteh-Baah (2024) [link] incorporate into the estimation of global poverty economies of scale in household consumption. They use a constant-elasticity scale adjustment that divides total household consumption or income by the square-root of household size (square-root approach) instead of the current method of dividing total household consumption or income by household size (per-capita approach). The current, per-capita approach of estimating global poverty at the World Bank assumes that there are no economies of scale in household consumption, that total household consumption expenditure doubles when household size doubles (e.g., a family of six needs three times as much as a family of two). However, the square-root approach of measuring poverty assumes that total household consumption expenditure increases by a half when household size doubles. The square-root approach is expected to be more consistent with household consumption patterns, as household public goods such as housing and consumer durables are shared among household members at limited or no marginal cost. 

Jolliffe and Tetteh-Baah (2024) [link] estimate global, regional, and country-level poverty using a scaled poverty line corresponding to the per-capita international poverty line of $2.15 (similar analysis is also done at the higher lines of $3.65 and $6.85). While the authors find minimal changes in 2019 global and regional poverty estimates (the largest change is a reduction of about 4 percentage points in the poverty rate for Sub-Saharan Africa), a total of 264 million people globally switch poverty status to being poor or non-poor (that is about 40% of the extreme poor). Non-monetary measures of poverty better align with the square-root approach. 

The paper adopts three approaches to setting the scaled poverty lines that incorporate household economies of scale into the estimation of global poverty. The estimates available in the PIP Innovation Hub are based on the approach proposed by Martin Ravallion. See the paper for discussion on the three approaches to setting the scaled poverty lines. The estimates based on the other two approaches are not provided in the PIP Innovation Hub but are available upon request.
