PIP relies on a mix of inequality and poverty estimates from consumption distributions and income distributions. The reason for this is that richer countries often do not collect detailed consumption data while incomes are hard and less meaningful to measure in poorer countries, where subsistence farming, which rarely is associated with a formal income, is widespread. Income distributions tend to be more unequal than consumption distributions because incomes can be very low (and even negative) due to negative capital shocks or for other reasons, while subsistence requires daily consumption to be above a minimum level. At the same time, individuals can have very high incomes in a given year but are likely to allocate some of this income for savings or investments rather than consumption. All of this poses a challenge for the comparability of poverty and inequality estimates across countries. 

[Wollburg ⓡ (2023)](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06679-0) addressed this issue by developing a method that converts income distributions to consumption distributions. The method is derived by exploiting 150 surveys spanning 16 countries where for a given year, there exists both an income distribution and consumption distribution in PIP. For each of these surveys, the distributions are converted to 100 percentiles ($p$) of matching income-consumption pairs (i.e. an income and consumption level at a particular percentile for a particular country-year). The authors tested different conversions relying on various assumptions about the distributional shapes that income and consumption follow. The conversion they ended up using is given by: $con_p = inc_p^0.92 + 0.68 + 0.26ln(inc_{median})$. 

The functional form reflects a scenario where the consumption and income distributions follow a 3-parameter log normal distribution while allowing for the consumption floor (the minimum observed consumption) to differ based on a country’s median income. The fit (when evaluated in the log-space) gives an $R^2=0.965$ and hence highly accurately converts income to consumption distributions. The conversion is not done at the household level, meaning that a particular household’s income level is not converted to a consumption level. Rather, the income percentiles are converted to consumption percentiles based on the equation above, hence the $p$-subscript. 