Surveys often struggle to capture the living conditions of the richest of the population. This “missing rich” issue stems from a plethora of reasons, including item nonresponse (richer households more likely to not respond to welfare related modules of the survey) unit nonresponse (richer households more likely to not partake in surveys), accessibility issues (the rich more likely to live in hard to access places such as gated communities), and underreporting of their welfare. Further, there are consumption patterns and income sources that are specifically consumed or earned by the rich that surveys often do not capture fully (e.g. capital income). Whilst the lack of accurate representation of the living conditions of the rich in the survey distribution will not have a huge effect on the poverty rate, it can significantly underestimate the level of inequality within societies.

One way in which this issue has been tackled is by utilizing the gap between the national account mean and the survey mean as a proxy for the "missing rich". Whilst [Lakner and Milanovic (2013)](https://doi.org/10.1596/1813-9450-6719) attributes the entire gap as the proxy for the missing top income in surveys, [Chandy and Seidel (2017)](https://www.brookings.edu/articles/how-much-do-we-really-know-about-inequality-within-countries-around-the-world/) argue that due to discrepancies in the definitions of income and consumption in surveys and national accounts, it is more justifiable to utilize a portion of the discrepancy between the survey mean and the national account mean. [Prydz, Jolliffe, and Serajuddin (2022)](https://doi.org/10.1111/roiw.12577) follow [Chandy and Seidel (2017)](https://www.brookings.edu/articles/how-much-do-we-really-know-about-inequality-within-countries-around-the-world/) and attribute 50% of the gap between Household Final Consumption Expenditure (HFCE) and the survey mean to the missing top. This analysis is also repeated by attributing 50% of the gap between GDP per capita and the survey mean.

The aim of this approach is first to elongate the survey distribution to capture the missing top by assuming that it follows a Pareto distribution; second is to attribute half of the survey-national accounts gap to the missing top represented by the extended portion of the survey distribution; and finally to reweight the survey distribution in light of the extended tail. In sum, this method imputes the "missing top" whilst maintaining the shape of the original survey distribution. In cases where the survey mean is greater than the national account mean, corrections are not applied.

For a more detailed explanation, please see [Chandy and Seidel (2017b)](https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/technical-appendix-02-13-17.pdf).

We also provide adjusted distributions and the resulting Ginis for attributing different shares of the survey-HFCE gap to the missing top. The data is available at 5 percentage point increments (attributing 5% of the survey-HFCE gap to the extended top, all the way to attributing 100% of the gap). Further, whilst the focus is on bridging the gap between survey and HFCE, we also provide adjustments based on the survey-GDP gap.

Additionally, whilst the choice of PPP (2017 vs 2021) will not affect the Gini estimates, the survey mean as well as the adjusted means will be different. All data is available for download for both PPPs.
